157022 11 US and World History 2
C2A92024 McGraw Hill. All Rights Reserved
07
READING STRATEGY
Analyzing Key Ideas and Details< /span> Use a graphic organizer such as this one to record the major battles discussed and the victor in each.
GUIDING QUESTION
Why was th e Doolittle Raid important for U.S. forces in the Pacific?
Admiral Ch ester Nimitz, the commander of the United States Navy in the Pacific, began planning operations against the Japanese Navy. Although the Japanese had b adly damaged the American fleet at Pearl Harbor, they had missed the Americ an aircraft carriers, which were at sea on a mission. The United States had several carriers in the Pacific, and Nimitz was determined to use them. In the days just after Pearl Harbor, however, Nimitz could do little to stop  JapanE28099s advance into Southeast Asia.
Admiral Ch ester Nimitz, the commander of the United States Navy in the Pacific, began planning operations against the Japanese Navy. Although the Japanese had b adly damaged the American fleet at Pearl Harbor, they had missed the Americ an aircraft carriers, which were at sea on a mission. The United States had several carriers in the Pacific, and Nimitz was determined to use them. In the days just after Pearl Harbor, however, Nimitz could do little to stop  JapanE28099s advance into Southeast Asia.
A few hour s after bombing Pearl Harbor, the Japanese attacked American airfields in t he Philippines. Two days later, they landed troops. The American and Filipi no forces defending the Philippines were badly outnumbered. Realizing MacAr thurE28099s capture so soon after Pearl Harbor would demoralize the Amer ican people, or cause them to lose confidence, President Roosevelt ordered  General MacArthur to evacuate to Australia. Instead, MacArthur retreated to the Bataan Peninsula.
By March,  the troops had eaten cavalry horses and mules in desperation. The lack of f ood and supplies, along with diseases such as malaria, scurvy, and dysenter y, took its toll. The women of the Army Nurse Corps worked on Bataan in pri mitive conditions. Patients slept in the open air. One nurse, Rose Meier, r eported, E2809CIf we needed more room, we got our axes and chopped some  bamboo trees down.E2809D MacArthur did then leave American troops behind on Bataan(but he vowed to return and rescue them.
On April 9 , 1942, the weary defenders of the Bataan Peninsula finally surrendered. Ne arly 78,000 prisoners of war were forced to march(sick, exhausted,  and starving(65 miles (105 km) to a Japanese prison camp. Almost 10 ,000 troops died on this march, which would later be called the Bataan Deat h March. The troops in the Bataan Peninsula surrendered, but a small force  held out on the island of Corregidor in Manila Bay until May 1942. The Phil ippines had finally fallen to the Japanese.
The fall o f the Philippines did not end resistance for large numbers of Filipinos, wh o fled to the islandsE28099 jungles and mountains to engage in guerrilla warfare against the occupying Japanese forces. As guerrilla fighters, they did not launch full-scale battles, but rather engaged in small-scale, surp rise attacks and sabotaged Japanese equipment. An estimated 300,000 Filipin os, including Filipino guerrilla units, fought the Japanese for three years , until MacArthurE28099s return. About one million Filipinos lost their  lives by the end of the war in 1945.
In 1941 a  presidential order brought all military forces in the Philippines under Ame rican control. President Roosevelt promised Filipino soldiers that they wou ld receive full U.S. military veteransE28099 benefits. However, in 1946  these benefits were denied when Congress passed the Rescission Act, which c anceled the benefits for the Filipino veterans and their families. It was n ot until the early 1990s that some Filipino veterans were granted U.S. citi zenship. Starting in 2009, surviving Filipino veterans who were American ci tizens and Filipino noncitizens received one-time payments for their servic e in the war.
A few hour s after bombing Pearl Harbor, the Japanese attacked American airfields in t he Philippines. Two days later, they landed troops. The American and Filipi no forces defending the Philippines were badly outnumbered. Realizing MacAr thurE28099s capture so soon after Pearl Harbor would demoralize the Amer ican people, President Roosevelt ordered General MacArthur to evacuate to A ustralia. Instead, MacArthur retreated to the Bataan Peninsula.
By March,  the troops had eaten cavalry horses and mules in desperation. The lack of f ood and supplies, along with diseases such as malaria, scurvy, and dysenter y, took its toll. The women of the Army Nurse Corps worked on Bataan in pri mitive conditions. Patients slept in the open air. One nurse, Rose Meier, r eported, E2809CIf we needed more room, we got our axes and chopped some  bamboo trees down.E2809D MacArthur did then leave American troops behind on Bataan(but he vowed to return and rescue them.
On April 9 , 1942, the weary defenders of the Bataan Peninsula finally surrendered. Ne arly 78,000 prisoners of war were forced to march(sick, exhausted,  and starving(65 miles (105 km) to a Japanese prison camp. Almost 10 ,000 troops died on this march, which would later be called the Bataan Deat h March. The troops in the Bataan Peninsula surrendered, but a small force  held out on the island of Corregidor in Manila Bay until May 1942. The Phil ippines had finally fallen to the Japanese.
The fall o f the Philippines did not end resistance for large numbers of Filipinos, wh o fled to the islandsE28099 jungles and mountains to engage in guerrilla warfare against the occupying Japanese forces. An estimated 300,000 Filipi nos, including Filipino guerrilla units, fought the Japanese for three year s, until MacArthurE28099s return. About one million Filipinos lost their lives by the end of the war in 1945.
In 1941 a  presidential order brought all military forces in the Philippines under Ame rican control. President Roosevelt promised Filipino soldiers that they wou ld receive full U.S. military veteransE28099 benefits. However, in 1946  these benefits were denied when Congress passed the Rescission Act, which c anceled the benefits for the Filipino veterans and their families. It was n ot until the early 1990s that some Filipino veterans were granted U.S. citi zenship. Starting in 2009, surviving Filipino veterans who were American ci tizens and Filipino noncitizens received one-time payments for their servic e in the war.

On December 8, 1941, fewer than ten hours after Japanese aircraft bombed  Pearl Harbor, U.S. airbases near Manila, the capital of the Philippines, we re also attacked by the Japanese air force. As war broke out, tens of thous ands of Filipinos living in the United States either volunteered for servic e or were recruited into the armed forces. Thousands of Filipinos still liv ing in the Philippines also enlisted to fight with the U.S. forces under Am erican command.
In February 1942 Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson established a unit mad e up of Americans of Filipino ancestry and Filipinos living in the U.S. who were not yet citizens to serve together in the U.S. Army. This unit became the 1st Filipino Regiment. The regimentE28099s motto was Laging Una , which means E2809CAlways FirstE2809D in the Tagalog language,  one of the major languages spoken in the Philippines. Almost 9,000 Filipino Americans and Filipinos served in and fought with the U.S. Army 1st and 2n d Filipino Infantry Regiments during World War II. Members of the 1st Regim ent also received special training in intelligence, sabotage, and demolitio n in Australia. These soldiers were sent to the Philippines to coordinate a ctions with Filipino guerrilla armies fighting the Japanese.
Following training in mid-1944, the 1st Regiment arrived in New Guinea, l ocated in the South Pacific, and fought in numerous battles before landing  in the Philippines at Tacloban, Leyte, in early February 1945. The regiment fought under General MacArthur and helped liberate the Philippines, eventu ally earning battle honors for its actions at New Guinea, Leyte, and the So uthern Philippines. In addition, the 1st earned the Philippine Presidential Unit Citation. Members of the 1st and 2nd Filipino regiments were awarded  more than 50,000 decorations for their actions in the war. In 2016 Congress awarded a collective Congressional Gold Medal to Filipino veterans in reco gnition of their service.
The 1st Filipino Regiment was made up of soldiers with Filipi no backgrounds and soldiers who had knowledge of the Philippines and could  work with Filipinos much better than other U.S. units and soldiers.
The coat of arms of the 1st Filipi no Regiment features the colors and stars from the flag of the Philippines, and the weapons on the shield represent two island tribes.
Even befor e the Philippines fell, President Roosevelt was searching for a way to rais e the morale of the American people. He wanted to bomb Tokyo, but American  planes could only reach Tokyo if an aircraft carrier brought them close eno ugh. However, Japanese ships in the North Pacific prevented carriers from g etting near Japan. In early 1942 a military planner suggested replacing the carrierE28099s usual short-range bombers with long-range B-25 bombers t hat could attack from farther away. The only problem was that, while B-25s  could take off from a carrier, the bombers could not land on its short deck . After attacking Japan, they would have to land in China.
President  Roosevelt put Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle in command of the mission  to bomb Tokyo. At the end of March, a crane loaded sixteen B-25s onto the a ircraft carrier Hornet. The next day, the Hornet headed west  across the Pacific. On April 18, American bombs fell on Japan for the first time. While Americans rejoiced in this small success, the Japanese were sh ocked at the raid. Those bombs could have killed Emperor Hirohito, who they regarded as a god.
The Doolit tle Raid convinced Japanese leaders to change their strategy. Officers in c harge of the navyE28099s planning wanted to cut American supply lines to Australia by capturing the south coast of New Guinea. But commander of the fleet, Admiral Yamamoto, wanted to attack Midway Island(the last A merican base in the North Pacific west of Hawaii. He believed that attackin g Midway would lure the American fleet into battle and enable his fleet to  destroy it.
After Dool ittleE28099s raid, the Japanese war planners dropped their opposition to YamamotoE28099s idea. The American fleet had to be destroyed to protect Tokyo from bombing. The attack on New Guinea would still go ahead, but onl y three aircraft carriers were assigned to the mission. All of the other ca rriers were ordered to assault Midway.
Even befor e the Philippines fell, President Roosevelt was searching for a way to rais e the morale of the American people. He wanted to bomb Tokyo, but American  planes could reach Tokyo only if an aircraft carrier brought them close eno ugh. However, Japanese ships in the North Pacific prevented carriers from g etting near Japan. In early 1942 a military planner suggested replacing the carrierE28099s usual short-range bombers with long-range B-25 bombers t hat could attack from farther away. The only problem was that, while B-25s  could take off from a carrier, the bombers could not land on its short deck . After attacking Japan, they would have to land in China.
President  Roosevelt put Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle in command of the mission  to bomb Tokyo. At the end of March, a crane loaded sixteen B-25s onto the a ircraft carrier Hornet. The next day, the Hornet headed w est across the Pacific. On April 18, American bombs fell on Japan for the f irst time. While Americans rejoiced in this small success, the Japanese wer e aghast at the raid. Those bombs could have killed Emperor Hirohito, who w as revered as a god.
The Doolit tle Raid convinced Japanese leaders to change their strategy. Officers in c harge of the navyE28099s planning wanted to cut American supply lines to Australia by capturing the south coast of New Guinea. But commander of the fleet, Admiral Yamamoto, wanted to attack Midway Island(the last A merican base in the North Pacific west of Hawaii. He believed that attackin g Midway would lure the American fleet into battle and enable his fleet to  destroy it.
After Dool ittleE28099s raid, the Japanese war planners dropped their opposition to YamamotoE28099s idea. The American fleet had to be destroyed to protect Tokyo from bombing. The attack on New Guinea would still go ahead, but onl y three aircraft carriers were assigned to the mission. All of the other ca rriers were ordered to assault Midway.
The Japane se believed that they could safely proceed with two attacks at once because they thought their operations were secret. What the Japanese did not know  was that an American team of code breakers based in Hawaii had already broken the Japan ese navyE28099s secret code for conducting operations.
In March 1 942 decoded Japanese messages alerted the United States to the Japanese att ack on New Guinea. Admiral Nimitz sent two carriers in response, the Yor ktown and the Lexington, to intercept the Japanese in the Coral  Sea. There, in early May, carriers from both sides launched all-out airstri kes against each other. Although the Japanese sank the Lexington and badly damaged the Yorktown, the American attacks prevented the Japa nese from landing on New GuineaE28099s south coast and kept the supply l ines to Australia open.
The Japane se believed that they could safely proceed with two attacks at once because they thought their operations were secret. What the Japanese did not know  was that an American team of code breakers based in Hawaii had already broken the Japan ese navyE28099s secret code for conducting operations.
In March 1 942 decoded Japanese messages alerted the United States to the Japanese att ack on New Guinea. Admiral Nimitz sent two carriers in response, the Yo rktown and the Lexington, to intercept the Japanese in the Co ral Sea. There, in early May, carriers from both sides launched all-out air strikes against each other. Although the Japanese sank the Lexington and badly damaged the Yorktown, the American attacks prevented  the Japanese from landing on New GuineaE28099s south coast and kept the  supply lines to Australia open.
When Ameri can marines stormed an enemy beach, they used radios to communicate; howeve r, that meant the Japanese could intercept and translate the messages. Amid battle, there was no time to use a code-machine. Acting upon the suggestio n of Philip Johnston, an engineer who had lived on a Navajo reservation as  a child, the marines recruited Navajos to serve as E2809Ccode talkers. E2809D Native American Choctaw and Cherokee soldiers provided these same assignments in the fighting on the Western Front in 1918 in World War I. The Navajo language had no written alphabet and was known only to the Navajo and a fe w missionaries and anthropologists. The Navajo recruits developed code word s, using their own language, that stood for military terms. For example, th e Navajo word jay-sho, or E2809Cbuzzard,E2809D was code for bo mber; lo-tso, or E2809Cwhale,E2809D meant battleship; and n i-ma-si, or E2809Cpotatoes,E2809D stood for grenades. Code talke rs proved invaluable. They could relay a message in minutes that would have taken a code-machine operator hours to convert and transmit. During the Ba ttle of Iwo Jima, code talkers transmitted more than eight hundred messages during the first forty-eight hours as the marines struggled to get ashore  under intense bombardment. Sworn to secrecy, their mission was not revealed until 1968. In 2001 Congress awarded the Navajo code talkers the Congressi onal Gold Medal for their unique contribution during the war.
The Navajo language had no written alphabet and was known only to the Navajo and a fe w missionaries and anthropologists. The Navajo recruits developed code word s, using their own language, that stood for military terms. For example, th e Navajo word jay-sho, or E2809Cbuzzard,E2809D was code for bo mber; lo-tso, or E2809Cwhale,E2809D meant battleship; and n i-ma-si, or E2809Cpotatoes,E2809D stood for grenades.
Code talke rs proved invaluable. They could relay a message in minutes that would have taken a code-machine operator hours to convert and transmit. During the Ba ttle of Iwo Jima, code talkers transmitted more than eight hundred messages during the first forty-eight hours as the marines struggled to get ashore  under intense bombardment. Sworn to secrecy, their mission was not revealed until 1968. In 2001 Congress awarded the Navajo code talkers the Congressi onal Gold Medal for their unique contribution during the war.
When Ameri can marines stormed an enemy beach, they used radios to communicate; howeve r, that meant the Japanese could intercept and translate the messages. Amid battle, there was no time to use a code-machine. Acting upon the suggestio n of Philip Johnston, an engineer who had lived on a Navajo reservation as  a child, the marines recruited Navajos to serve as E2809Ccode talkers. E2809D Native American Choctaw and Cherokee soldiers provided these same assignments in the fighting on the Western Front in 1918 in World War I. The Navajo language had no written alphabet and was known only to the Navajo and a fe w missionaries and anthropologists. The Navajo recruits developed code word s, using their own language, that stood for military terms. For example, th e Navajo word jay-sho, or E2809Cbuzzard,E2809D was code for  bomber; lo-tso, or E2809Cwhale,E2809D meant battleship; and  ni-ma-si, or E2809Cpotatoes,E2809D stood for grenades. Code talke rs proved invaluable. They could relay a message in minutes that would have taken a code machine operator hours to encipher and transmit. During the B attle of Iwo Jima, code talkers transmitted more than 800 messages during t he first forty-eight hours as the marines struggled to get ashore under int ense bombardment. Sworn to secrecy, their mission was not revealed until 19 68. In 2001 Congress awarded the Navajo code talkers the Congressional Gold Medal for their unique contribution during the war.
The Navajo language had no written alphabet and was known only to the Navajo and a fe w missionaries and anthropologists. The Navajo recruits developed code word s, using their own language, that stood for military terms. For example, th e Navajo word jay-sho, or E2809Cbuzzard,E2809D was code for  bomber; lo-tso, or E2809Cwhale,E2809D meant battleship; and  ni-ma-si, or E2809Cpotatoes,E2809D stood for grenades.
Code talke rs proved invaluable. They could relay a message in minutes that would have taken a code machine operator hours to encipher and transmit. During the B attle of Iwo Jima, code talkers transmitted more than 800 messages during t he first forty-eight hours as the marines struggled to get ashore under int ense bombardment. Sworn to secrecy, their mission was not revealed until 19 68. In 2001 Congress awarded the Navajo code talkers the Congressional Gold Medal for their unique contribution during the war.
Albert Smith, a Navajo Code Talker, is interviewed during a reception that preced ed the Congressional Gold Medal ceremony honoring code talkers.
The co ntributions of minorities to the war effort were often not officially recog nized until long after the war was over. Similar to the experiences of Afri can Americans and Japanese Americans, the Navajo Code Talkers were not hono red for their World War II service until 2001. Being an American includes h aving pride in oneE28099s heritage, as evidenced by Albert Smith wearing a Navajo necklace and bracelets along with his military ribbons and emblem . The contributions to the war effort by minorities were often unique.
John K insel, Sr., a Navajo Code Talker, discusses examples of Navajo code words u sed to transmit messages during World War II.
CHECK FOR UNDERSTANDING
Roosev elt wanted to bomb Tokyo, but aircraft carriers could not get close enough  for short-range planes to get to Japan. The Doolittle Raid, using long-rang e B-25 planes, bombed Japan for the first time. This prompted Japanese mili tary leaders to change their strategy and make plans to attack Midway.
The Un ited States lost one aircraft carrier and another was damaged. However, the United States was able to prevent Japan from capturing the strategically i mportant south coast of New Guinea. As a result, Japan was not able to cut  off U.S. supply lines, which were crucial for success in the Pacific.
GUIDING QUESTION
What was t he strategic thinking behind island hopping?
Back at Pe arl Harbor, the code-breaking team learned of the plan to attack Midway. Wi th so many ships at sea, Admiral Yamamoto transmitted the plans for the Mid way attack by radio, using code the Americans had already cracked.
Admiral Ni mitz had been waiting for the chance to ambush, or attack by surprise, the  Japanese fleet. He immediately ordered carriers to take up positions near M idway. Unaware that they were heading into an ambush, the Japanese launched their aircraft against Midway on June 4, 1942. The Japanese ran into heavy antiaircraft fire, and thirty-eight planes were shot down. As the Japanese prepared a second Midway attack, aircraft from the American carriers Ho rnet, Yorktown, and Enterprise launched a counterattack. The Ame rican planes caught the Japanese carriers with fuel, bombs, and aircraft ex posed on their flight decks. Within minutes, three Japanese carriers were r educed to burning wrecks. A fourth was sunk a few hours later, and Yamamoto ordered his remaining ships to retreat.
Back at Pe arl Harbor, the code-breaking team learned of the plan to attack Midway. Wi th so many ships at sea, Admiral Yamamoto transmitted the plans for the Mid way attack by radio, using code the Americans had already cracked.
Admiral Ni mitz had been waiting for the chance to ambush the Japanese fleet. He immed iately ordered carriers to take up positions near Midway. Unaware that they were heading into an ambush, the Japanese launched their aircraft against  Midway on June 4, 1942. The Japanese ran into a blitz of antiaircraft fire, and 38 planes were shot down. As the Japanese prepared a second Midway att ack, aircraft from the American carriers Hornet, Yorktown, and Enterprise launched a counterattack. The American planes caught the J apanese carriers with fuel, bombs, and aircraft exposed on their flight dec ks. Within minutes, three Japanese carriers were reduced to burning wrecks. A fourth was sunk a few hours later, and Yamamoto ordered his remaining sh ips to retreat.
The B attle of Midway The Battle of Midway was fought predominantly by aircra ft.
Click here for the interactive version of this map.< /a>
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Japan launched the Midway attack on June 4, 1942 at 4:30 a.m.
They shortened the flying distance, thereby reducing the amount of fuel t he planes consumed and providing a way to conduct battle in the oceanE280 99s expanse.
The Battle of Midway was a turning point in the war. The Japanese navy lost four larg e carriers(the heart of its fleet. Just six months after Pearl Harb or, the United States had stopped the Japanese advance. The victory, howeve r, was not without cost. The battle killed 362 Americans and 3,057 Japanese .
The Battle of Midway was a turning point in the war. The Japanese navy lost four larg e carriers(the heart of its fleet. Just six months after Pearl Harb or, the United States had stopped the Japanese advance. The victory, howeve r, was not without cost. The battle killed 362 Americans and 3,057 Japanese .
The Americ an plan to defeat Japan called for a two-pronged attack. The Pacific Fleet, commanded by Admiral Nimitz, would advance through the central Pacific by  E2809ChoppingE2809D from one island to the next, closer and closer to Japan. Meanwhile, MacArthurE28099s troops would advance through the Sol omon Islands, capture the north coast of New Guinea, and then launch an inv asion to retake the Philippines.
By the fal l of 1943, the navy was ready to launch its island-hopping campaign, but th e geography of the central Pacific posed a problem. Many of the islands wer e coral reef atolls, or places where the reefs create islands. The water ov er the coral reef was not always deep enough to allow landing craft to get  to the shore. If the landing craft ran aground on the reef, the troops woul d have to wade to the beach, risking exposure and high casualties.
At Tarawa, when the landing craft hit the reef, at least twenty ships ran aground. Th e marines had to plunge into shoulder-high water and wade several hundred y ards to the beach. Raked by Japanese fire, only one marine in three made it ashore. Once the marines reached the beach, the battle was still far from  over.
The Americ an plan to defeat Japan called for a two-pronged attack. The Pacific Fleet, commanded by Admiral Nimitz, would advance through the central Pacific by  E2809ChoppingE2809D from one island to the next, closer and closer to Japan. Meanwhile, MacArthurE28099s troops would advance through the Sol omon Islands, capture the north coast of New Guinea, and then launch an inv asion to retake the Philippines.
By the fal l of 1943, the navy was ready to launch its island-hopping campaign, but th e geography of the central Pacific posed a problem. Many of the islands wer e coral reef atolls, or places where the reefs create islands. The water ov er the coral reef was not always deep enough to allow landing craft to get  to the shore. If the landing craft ran aground on the reef, the troops woul d have to wade to the beach, risking exposure and high casualties.
At Tarawa, when the landing craft hit the reef, at least 20 ships ran aground. The ma rines had to plunge into shoulder-high water and wade several hundred yards to the beach. Raked by Japanese fire, only one marine in three made it ash ore. Once the marines reached the beach, the battle was still far from over .
The fighti ng was brutal. As one soldier, Robert Sherrod, recounted:
The fighti ng was brutal. As one soldier, Robert Sherrod, recounted:
E2809C
E2809D
(Robert Sherrod, from Tarawa: The Story of a Battle Although m any troops died wading ashore, one boat was able to cross the reef and deli ver troops to the beaches. The vehicle nicknamed the E2809CAlligator,E2 809D or amphtrac , was invented in the 1930s to rescue people in Florida swamps. N ever used in combat, the navy decided to buy only 200 of them in 1941. If m ore had been at Tarawa, American casualties likely would have been much low er. More than 1,000 marines lost their lives there. Photos of bodies lying  crumpled next to burning landing craft shocked Americans at home and people wondered how many lives would be lost in defeating Japan. The next a ssault(Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands(went more sm oothly. This time all the troops went ashore in amphtracs. Although the Jap anese resisted fiercely, the marines captured Kwajalein and nearby Eniwetok with far fewer casualties. After the  Marshall Islands, the navy targeted the Mariana Islands. American military  planners wanted to use the Marianas as a base for a new heavy bomber, the B -29 Superfortress. The B-29 could fly farther than any other plane in the w orld. From airfields in the Marianas, B-29s could bomb Japan. Admiral Nimit z decided to invade three of the Mariana Islands: Saipan, Tinian, and Guam. Despite strong Japanese resistance, American troops captured all three by  August 1944. A few months later, B-29s began bombing Japan. Although m any troops died wading ashore, one boat was able to cross the reef and deli ver troops to the beaches. The vehicle nicknamed the E2809CAlligator,E2 809D or amphtrac , was invented in the 1930s to rescue people in Florida swamps. N ever used in combat, the navy decided to buy only 200 of them in 1941. If m ore had been at Tarawa, American casualties likely would have been much low er. More than 1,000 marines lost their lives there. Photos of bodies lying  crumpled next to burning landing craft shocked Americans at home, and peopl e wondered how many lives would be lost in defeating Japan. The next a ssault(Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands(went more sm oothly. This time all the troops went ashore in amphtracs. Although the Jap anese resisted fiercely, the marines captured Kwajalein and nearby Eniwetok with far fewer casualties. After the  Marshall Islands, the navy targeted the Mariana Islands. American military  planners wanted to use the Marianas as a base for a new heavy bomber, the B -29 Superfortress. The B-29 could fly farther than any other plane in the w orld. From airfields in the Marianas, B-29s could bomb Japan. Admiral Nimit z decided to invade three of the Mariana Islands: Saipan, Tinian, and Guam. Despite strong Japanese resistance, American troops captured all three by  August 1944. A few months later, B-29s began bombing Japan. I sland Hopping in the Pacific, 1942E280931945 The Pacific Fleet gained control of the Pacific isl ands one by one on its way to defeat Japan. Click here for the interactive version of this  map. McGraw-HillThe Japanese Empire and its conquests include Japan, parts o f China, Burma, Thailand, Sumatra, Borneo, the Philippines, New Guinea, and nearly all of the Pacific islands east of Japan including the Northern Mar iana Islands, Marshall Islands, Guam, Gilbert Islands, and some of the Aleu tian Islands. The furthest extent of JapanE28099s conquests in July 1942 was approximately 2,000 miles west of the country, halfway between the Haw aiian Islands and Marshall Islands. The path of Allied forces and subsequen t battles are as follows. In November 1943, the Nimitz sailed southwest fro m Pearl Harbor in the Hawaiian Islands to the battle of Tarawa in the Gilbe rt Islands from November 20 to 23, 1943. Allied forces continued northwest  to a battle at the Marshall Islands in February 1944, Saipan from June 15 t hrough July 9 1944, and Guam from July 21 to August 10, 1944. The Allies th en split off, north to battle at Iwo Jima February 19 through March 26, 194 5, northwest to battle at Okinawa from April 1 to June 22, 1945, and southw est to Palau Island, then to battle at Leyte Gulf in the Philippines from O ctober 23 to 26, 1944. Allied forces also moved northwest from New Hebrides to battle at Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands from August 7, 1942 to Feb ruary 9, 1943, then northwest to New Guinea. Forces under the command of Ha lsey and Macarthur then split, and both moved north to the Philippines. Mac arthur continued north to the battle at Manila on March 4, 1945, then north west to the battle at Okinawa. Atomic bombings are marked at Hiroshima on  August 6, 1945, and Nagasaki on August 9, 1945.The Japanese Empire and its conquest s include Japan, parts of China, Burma, Thailand, Sumatra, Borneo, the Phil ippines, New Guinea, and nearly all of the Pacific islands east of Japan in cluding the Northern Mariana Islands, Marshall Islands, Guam, Gilbert Islan ds, and some of the Aleutian Islands. The furthest extent of JapanE28099 s conquests in July 1942 was approximately 2,000 miles west of the country, halfway between the Hawaiian Islands and Marshall Islands. The path of All ied forces and subsequent battles are as follows. In November 1943, the Nim itz sailed southwest from Pearl Harbor in the Hawaiian Islands to the battl e of Tarawa in the Gilbert Islands from November 20 to 23, 1943. Allied for ces continued northwest to a battle at the Marshall Islands in February 194 4, Saipan from June 15 through July 9 1944, and Guam from July 21 to August 10, 1944. The Allies then split off, north to battle at Iwo Jima February  19 through March 26, 1945, northwest to battle at Okinawa from April 1 to J une 22, 1945, and southwest to Palau Island, then to battle at Leyte Gulf i n the Philippines from October 23 to 26, 1944. Allied forces also moved nor thwest from New Hebrides to battle at Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands fr om August 7, 1942 to February 9, 1943, then northwest to New Guinea. Forces under the command of Halsey and Macarthur then split, and both moved north to the Philippines. Macarthur continued north to the battle at Manila on M arch 4, 1945, then north west to the battle at Okinawa. Atomic bombings are marked at Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, and Nagasaki on August 9, 1945.">Long Description GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION Answers Admiral Nimitz went to Tarawa, part of the Gilbert Islands. Answers The map shows how U.S. forces progressed from Hawaii to Japan by hopp ing from island to island through the Pacific, getting closer to Japan. 20 Returning to  the Philippines As the for ces under Admiral Nimitz hopped across the central Pacific, MacArthurE280 99s troops began their own campaign in the southwest Pacific. By early 194 4, MacArthurE28099s troops finally captured enough islands to surround t he main Japanese base in the region. The Japanese withdrew their ships and  aircraft from the base, although they left 100,000 troops behind to hold th e island. Worried that the navyE28099s advance across the central Pacifi c was leaving him behind, MacArthur ordered his forces to leap nearly 600 m iles (966 km) to capture the Japanese base at Hollandia on the north coast  of New Guinea. Shortly after securing New Guinea, MacArthurE28099s troop s seized the island of Morotai(the last stop before the Philippines . To take ba ck the Philippines, the United States assembled an enormous invasion force. In October 1944, over 700 ships carrying more than 160,000 troops sailed f or Leyte Gulf in the Philippines. On October 20, the troops began to land o n Leyte, an island on the eastern side of the Philippines. A few hours afte r the invasion began, MacArthur waded ashore. He made a radio broadcast:  E2809CPeople of the Philippines, I have returned. . . . [O]ur forces sta nd again on Philippine soil.E2809D To stop th e American invasion, the Japanese sent four aircraft carriers toward the Ph ilippines from the north and secretly dispatched another fleet from the wes t. Most of the American carriers protecting the invasion left Leyte Gulf an d headed north to stop them. The Japanese warships to the west raced throug h the Philippine Islands into Leyte Gulf and ambushed the remaining America n ships. The Battle of Leyte Gulf was the largest naval battle in history. It was also the fir st time that the Japanese used kamikaze attacks. Kamikaze pilots would deliberately crash their planes into American ships, inflicting severe damage. Luckily  for Americans, as the situation was becoming desperate, the Japanese comman der, believing more American ships were on the way, ordered a retreat. Although t he Japanese fleet had retreated, the campaign to recapture the Philippines  from the Japanese was long and grueling. More than 80,000 Japanese were kil led; fewer than 1,000 surrendered. MacArthurE28099s troops did not captu re Manila until March 1945. The battle left the city in ruins and more than 100,000 Filipino civilians dead. The remaining Japanese retreated into the rugged terrain north of Manila; they were still fighting in August 1945 wh en word came that Japan had surrendered. As the for ces under Admiral Nimitz hopped across the central Pacific, MacArthurE280 99s troops began their own campaign in the southwest Pacific. By early 194 4, MacArthurE28099s troops finally captured enough islands to surround t he main Japanese base in the region. The Japanese withdrew their ships and  aircraft from the base, although they left 100,000 troops behind to hold th e island. Worried th at the navyE28099s advance across the central Pacific was leaving him be hind, MacArthur ordered his forces to leap nearly 600 miles (966 km) to cap ture the Japanese base at Hollandia on the north coast of New Guinea. Short ly after securing New Guinea, MacArthurE28099s troops seized the island  of Morotai(the last stop before the Philippines. To take ba ck the Philippines, the United States assembled an enormous invasion force. In October 1944, over 700 ships carrying more than 160,000 troops sailed f or Leyte Gulf in the Philippines. On October 20, the troops began to land o n Leyte, an island on the eastern side of the Philippines. A few hours afte r the invasion began, MacArthur waded ashore. He made a radio broadcast:  E2809CPeople of the Philippines, I have returned. ... [O]ur forces stand again on Philippine soil.E2809D To stop th e American invasion, the Japanese sent four aircraft carriers toward the Ph ilippines from the north and secretly dispatched another fleet from the wes t. Most of the American carriers protecting the invasion left Leyte Gulf an d headed north to stop them. The Japanese warships to the west raced throug h the Philippine Islands into Leyte Gulf and ambushed the remaining America n ships. The Battle of Leyte Gulf was the largest naval battle in history. It was also the fir st time that the Japanese used kamikaze attacks. Kamikaze pilots would deliberat ely crash their planes into American ships, inflicting severe damage. Lucki ly for Americans, as the situation was becoming desperate, the Japanese com mander, believing more American ships were on the way, ordered a retreat. Although t he Japanese fleet had retreated, the campaign to recapture the Philippines  from the Japanese was long and grueling. More than 80,000 Japanese were kil led; fewer than 1,000 surrendered. MacArthurE28099s troops did not captu re Manila until March 1945. The battle left the city in ruins and more than 100,000 Filipino civilians dead. The remaining Japanese retreated into the rugged terrain north of Manila; they were still fighting in August 1945 wh en word came that Japan had surrendered. CHECK FOR UNDERSTANDING Answers The is land-hopping strategy sought to recapture islands lost earlier to the Japan ese, stop the Japanese offensive, and slowly advance toward Japan. Later, t he strategy successfully allowed planes to bomb Tokyo. Answers The U. S. Navy drove back Japanese forces by island hopping and taking control of  each island the Japanese had captured, which moved U.S. forces closer to Ja pan. Ending the Wa r GUIDING QUESTION Why did Tr uman decide to use the atomic bomb? President  Roosevelt died of a stroke on April 12, 1945, while vacationing in Warm Spr ings, Georgia. His vice president, Harry S. Truman, became president. The n ext day, Truman told reporters: E2809CBoys, if you ever pray, pray for m e now. . . . When they told me yesterday what had happened, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me.E2809D Truman beg an to make decisions about the war. Although Germany surrendered a few week s later, war with Japan continued, and Truman was forced to make some of th e most difficult decisions of the war, and of his life, during his first si x months in office. President  Roosevelt died of a stroke on April 12, 1945 while vacationing in Warm Spri ngs, Georgia. His vice president, Harry S. Truman, became president. The ne xt day, Truman told reporters: E2809CBoys, if you ever pray, pray for me now. ... When they told me yesterday what  had happened, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fall en on me.E2809D Truman began to make decisions about the war. Although G ermany surrendered a few weeks later, war with Japan continued, and Truman  was forced to make some of the most difficult decisions of the war, and of  his life, during his first six months in office.Truman,  Harry S. "Swearing in of Harry Truman." April 12, 1945.Credit The Battle of Iwo Jima On Novembe r 24, 1944, bombs fell on Tokyo. Eighty B-29 Superfortress bombers traveled more than 1,500 miles (2,414 km) from new American bases in the Mariana Is lands. By the time the B-29s reached Japan, however, they did not have enou gh fuel left to fix their navigational errors or to adjust for high winds.  Many of their bombs missed the targets. The pilots needed an island closer  to Japan so the B-29s could refuel. American military planners chose Iwo Ji ma. It was halfway between the Marianas and Japan, but its geography was fo rmidable, or difficult to attack. It had a dormant volcano at its southern  tip and rugged terrain with rocky cliffs, jagged ravines, and dozens of cav es. Volcanic ash covered the ground. Even worse, the Japanese had built a v ast network of concrete bunkers connected by miles of tunnels. On Februar y 19, 1945, some 60,000 marines landed on Iwo Jima. As the troops leapt fro m the amphtracs, they sank up to their ankles in soft ash and drew intense  fire from Japanese artillery. The marines crawled inland, attacking the Jap anese bunkers with flamethrowers and explosives. More than 6,800 marines we re killed capturing the island. Admiral Nimitz later wrote that on Iwo Jima , E2809Cuncommon valor was a common virtue.E2809D On Novembe r 24, 1944, bombs fell on Tokyo. Eighty B-29 Superfortress bombers traveled more than 1,500 miles (2,414 km) from new American bases in the Mariana Is lands. By the time the B-29s reached Japan, however, they did not have enou gh fuel left to fix their navigational errors or to adjust for high winds.  Many of their bombs missed the targets. The pilots needed an island closer  to Japan so the B-29s could refuel. American military planners chose Iwo Ji ma. It was hal fway between the Marianas and Japan, but its geography was formidable. It h ad a dormant volcano at its southern tip and rugged terrain with rocky clif fs, jagged ravines, and dozens of caves. Volcanic ash covered the ground. E ven worse, the Japanese had built a vast network of concrete bunkers connec ted by miles of tunnels. On Februar y 19, 1945, some 60,000 marines landed on Iwo Jima. As the troops leapt fro m the amphtracs, they sank up to their ankles in soft ash and were pounded  by Japanese artillery. The marines crawled inland, attacking the Japanese b unkers with flamethrowers and explosives. More than 6,800 marines were kill ed capturing the island. Admiral Nimitz later wrote that on Iwo Jima, E2 809Cuncommon valor was a common virtue.E2809DFleet  Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, 17 March 1945, CINCPACFLT Communique No. 300, Wo rld War II Command File, Papers of Chester W. Nimitz, Operational Archives  Branch, Naval Historical Center, Washington, D.C.Credit PF-(aircraft)/Alamy Stock Photo Marine s raise the American flag at the highest point on Iwo Jima, February 23, 19 45. This photograph has appeared on magazine covers, postage stamps, films, and sculptures since that time. < /div> Answers At the time the photograph was taken, American spirits would have been li fted by this symbol of victory. Rosenthal captured these courageous men in  a moment of brotherhood, an image that evokes pride and admiration in the v iewer. While Amer ican engineers prepared airfields on Iwo Jima, General Curtis LeMay, comman der of the B-29s based in the Marianas, changed strategy. To help the B-29s hit their targets, he ordered them to drop bombs filled with napalm(a type o f jellied gasoline. The bombs would not only explode but would also start f ires. Even if the B-29s missed their targets, the fires they started would  spread to the intended targets. The use of firebombs was controversial because the fires would also kill many civilia ns; however, LeMay could think of no other way to quickly destroy JapanE2 8099s war production. Loaded with firebombs, B-29s attacked Tokyo on Marc h 9, 1945. As strong winds fanned the flames, the firestorm grew so intense that it sucked the oxygen out of the air, suffocating thousands. While Amer ican engineers prepared airfields on Iwo Jima, General Curtis LeMay, comman der of the B-29s based in the Marianas, changed strategy. To help the B-29s hit their targets, he ordered them to drop bombs filled with napalm(a type o f jellied gasoline. The bombs would not only explode but would also start f ires. Even if the B-29s missed their targets, the fires they started would  spread to the intended targets. The use of firebombs was controversial because the fires would also kill many civilia ns; however, LeMay could think of no other way to quickly destroy JapanE2 8099s war production. Loaded with firebombs, B-29s attacked Tokyo on Marc h 9, 1945. As strong winds fanned the flames, the firestorm grew so intense that it sucked the oxygen out of the air, asphyxiating thousands. 20 The firebo mbing of Tokyo killed more than 80,000 people and destroyed more than 250,0 00 buildings. By the end of June 1945, JapanE28099s six key industrial c ities had been firebombed. By the end of the war, the B-29s had firebombed  67 Japanese cities. The firebo mbing of Tokyo killed more than 80,000 people and destroyed more than 250,0 00 buildings. By the end of June 1945, JapanE28099s six key industrial c ities had been firebombed. By the end of the war, the B-29s had firebombed  67 Japanese cities. Unconditional Surrender There were few signs in the spring of 1945 that Japan was ready to quit. Many America n officials believed Japan must be invaded. To prepare for the invasion, th e United States needed a base near Japan to stockpile supplies and build up troops. Military planners chose Okinawa(only 350 miles (563 km) fr om mainland Japan. American t roops landed on Okinawa on April 1, 1945. Japanese troops took up positions in the islandE28099s rugged mountains. To force the Japanese out of the ir caves and bunkers, the American troops had to fight their way up steep s lopes against constant machine gun and artillery fire. More than 12,000 Ame rican soldiers, sailors, and marines died during the fighting, but by June  22, 1945, Okinawa had finally been captured. Shortly af ter the United States captured Okinawa, Japanese emperor Hirohito urged his government to find a way to end the war. American officials knew that the  fate of Hirohito was the most important issue for the Japanese. Demands for unconditional surrender might mean that the emperor would step down. Many  Japanese leaders were willing to surrender, but only on the condition that  Hirohito stay in power. Most Americans, however, wanted to remove the emper or from power. President Truman was reluctant to go against public opinion. Furthermore, he knew the United States was almost ready to test the new at omic bomb that might drive Japan to surrender. There were few signs in the spring of 1945 that Japan was ready to quit. Many America n officials believed Japan must be invaded. To prepare for the invasion, th e United States needed a base near Japan to stockpile supplies and build up troops. Military planners chose Okinawa(only 350 miles (563 km) fr om mainland Japan. American t roops landed on Okinawa on April 1, 1945. Japanese troops took up positions in the islandE28099s rugged mountains. To force the Japanese out of the ir caves and bunkers, the American troops had to fight their way up steep s lopes against constant machine gun and artillery fire. More than 12,000 Ame rican soldiers, sailors, and marines died during the fighting, but by June  22, 1945, Okinawa had finally been captured. Shortly af ter the United States captured Okinawa, Japanese emperor Hirohito urged his government to find a way to end the war. American officials knew that the  fate of Hirohito was the most important issue for the Japanese. Demands for unconditional surrender might mean that the emperor would step down. Many  Japanese leaders were willing to surrender, but only on the condition that  Hirohito stay in power. Most Americans, however, wanted to remove the emper or from power. President Truman was reluctant to go against public opinion. Furthermore, he knew the United States was almost ready to test the new at omic bomb that might drive Japan to surrender. Using the Ato mic Bomb In 1939 Le o Szilard, a Jewish physicist who had fled Nazi persecution, learned that G erman scientists had split the uranium atom. Szilard had been the first sci entist to suggest that splitting the atom might release enormous energy. Sz ilard convinced the worldE28099s best-known physicist, Albert Einstein,  to sign a letter Szilard had drafted and send it to President Roosevelt. Th e letter warned that by using uranium, E2809Cextremely powerful bombs of a new type may . . . be constructed.E2809D Roosevelt  responded by setting up a scientific committee to study the issue. In 1941  the committee met with British scientists who were already working on an at omic bomb. The Americans convinced Roosevelt to launch a program to build a n atomic bomb. The secret American program to build an atomic bomb was code-named the Manhattan Proj ect and was headed by General Leslie R. Groves. The first breakthrough came in 1942, when Szilard and Enrico Fermi, another physicist, built the world E28099s first nuclear reactor at the University of Chicago. Groves then organ ized a team of engineers and scientists to build an atomic bomb at a secret laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico. Physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer led  the team. On July 16, 1945, they detonated the worldE28099s first atomic bomb in New Mexico. In 1939 Le o Szilard, a Jewish physicist who had fled Nazi persecution, learned that G erman scientists had split the uranium atom. Szilard had been the first sci entist to suggest that splitting the atom might release enormous energy. Sz ilard convinced the worldE28099s best-known physicist, Albert Einstein,  to sign a letter Szilard had drafted and send it to President Roosevelt. Th e letter warned that by using uranium, E2809Cextremely powerful bombs of a new type may ... be constructed.E280 9DLetter from Albert Einstein to President Franklin D.  Roosevelt, August 2, 1939.Credit Roosevelt  responded by setting up a scientific committee to study the issue. In 1941  the committee met with British scientists who were already working on an at omic bomb. The Americans convinced Roosevelt to launch a program to build a n atomic bomb. The secret American program to build an atomic bomb was code-named the Manhattan Proj ect and was headed by General Leslie R. Groves. The first breakthrough came in 1942, when Szilard and Enrico Fermi, another physicist, built the world E28099s first nuclear reactor at the University of Chicago. Groves then organ ized a team of engineers and scientists to build an atomic bomb at a secret laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico. Physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer led  the team. On July 16, 1945, they detonated the worldE28099s first atomic bomb in New Mexico. 20 Even befor e the bomb was tested, officials began debating how to use it. Admiral Will iam Leahy, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, opposed using the bomb be cause it would kill civilians. He believed an economic blockade and convent ional bombing would convince Japan to surrender. Secretary of War Henry Sti mson wanted to warn the Japanese about the bomb and tell them their emperor could stay in power if they surrendered. Secretary of State James Byrnes,  however, wanted to drop the bomb on Japan without any warning. President  Truman later wrote that he E2809Cregarded the bomb as a military weapon  and never had any doubt that it should be used.E2809D His advisers had w arned him to expect massive casualties if the United States invaded Japan.  Truman believed it was his duty as president to use every weapon available  to save American lives. The Allies threatened Japan with E2809Cprompt an d utter destructionE2809D if the nation did not surrender, but the Japan ese did not reply. Truman then ordered the military to drop the bomb. On Au gust 6, 1945, a B-29 bomber named Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb,  code-named E2809CLittle Boy,E2809D on Hiroshima, an important industr ial city. The bomb d estroyed about 63 percent of the city. Between 80,000 and 120,000 people, i ncluding children, died instantly, and thousands more died later from burns and radiation sickness. Three days later, on August 9, the Soviet Union de clared war on Japan. Later that day, the United States dropped another atom ic bomb, code-named E2809CFat Man,E2809D on the city of Nagasaki, kil ling between 35,000 and 74,000 people. Faced with such massive destruction  and the shock of the Soviets joining the war, Hirohito ordered his governme nt to surrender. On August 15, 1945(V-J Day(Japan surrender ed. The long war was finally over. Even befor e the bomb was tested, officials began debating how to use it. Admiral Will iam Leahy, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, opposed using the bomb be cause it would kill civilians. He believed an economic blockade and convent ional bombing would convince Japan to surrender. Secretary of War Henry Sti mson wanted to warn the Japanese about the bomb and tell them their emperor could stay in power if they surrendered. Secretary of State James Byrnes,  however, wanted to drop the bomb on Japan without any warning. President  Truman later wrote that he E2809Cregarded the bomb as a military weapon  and never had any doubt that it should be used.E2809D His advisers had w arned him to expect massive casualties if the United States invaded Japan.  Truman believed it was his duty as president to use every weapon available  to save American lives. The Allies threatened Japan with E2809Cprompt an d utter destructionE2809D if the nation did not surrender, but the Japan ese did not reply. Truman then ordered the military to drop the bomb. On Au gust 6, 1945, a B-29 bomber named Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb , code-named E2809CLittle Boy,E2809D on Hiroshima, an important indus trial city.President Harry S. Truman, as quoted in Voice s of the American Past: Documents in U.S. History by Raymond M. Hyser and J . Chris Arndt. Copyright C2A9 2008, 2004 by Thomson Wadsworth, a part of  The Thomson Corporation.Credit The bomb d estroyed about 63 percent of the city. Between 80,000 and 120,000 people, i ncluding children, died instantly, and thousands more died later from burns and radiation sickness. Three days later, on August 9, the Soviet Union de clared war on Japan. Later that day, the United States dropped another atom ic bomb, code-named E2809CFat Man,E2809D on the city of Nagasaki, kil ling between 35,000 and 74,000 people. Faced with such massive destruction  and the shock of the Soviets joining the war, Hirohito ordered his governme nt to surrender. On August 15, 1945(V-J Day(Japan surrender ed. The long war was finally over. Explore each of the four slides with the button s below them. Answers Answer s should describe the total decimation of the area. Putting the E nemy on Trial In August  1945, the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union created the  International Military Tribunal (IMT) to punish German and Japanese leaders for war crimes. The tribunal held trials in Nuremberg, Germany, where Hitl er had staged Nazi Party rallies. In January 1946, the International Military Tribunal for the Far East (IMTFE) was cre ated in Tokyo, authorized by an agreement among the United States, the Sovi et Union, and the United Kingdom. Like the trials held in Nuremberg, the pu rpose of the Tokyo War Crimes trials was to punish Japanese leaders. The IMTFE  prosecuted nine senior Japanese leaders and 18 military leaders. During the trials, which lasted from 1946 to 1948, all defendants were found guilty.  Punishments ranged from imprisonment to death. Hirohito was not indicted by the IMTFE, as some feared that any attempt to put the emperor on trial wou ld lead to an uprising. The emperor was allowed to remain on the throne, bu t in a ceremonial role only. The IMT tr ials punished many of the people responsible for World War II and the Holoc aust, but they were also part of the American plan for building a better wo rld. As Robert Jackson, chief counsel for the United States at Nuremberg, s aid in his opening statement to the court: E2809CThe wrongs we seek to c ondemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot su rvive their being repeated.E2809D In August  1945, the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union created the  International Military Tribunal (IMT) to punish German and Japanese leaders for war crimes. The tribunal held trials in Nuremberg, Germany, where Hitl er had staged Nazi Party rallies. In January 1946, the International Military Tribunal for the Far East (IMTFE) was cre ated in Tokyo, authorized by an agreement among the United States, the Sovi et Union, and the United Kingdom. Like the trials held in Nuremberg, the pu rpose of the Tokyo War Crimes trials was to punish Japanese leaders. The IMTFE  prosecuted nine senior Japanese leaders and 18 military leaders. During the trials, which lasted from 1946 to 1948, all defendants were found guilty.  Punishments ranged from imprisonment to death. Hirohito was not indicted by the IMTFE, as some feared that any attempt to put the emperor on trial wou ld lead to an uprising. The emperor was allowed to remain on the throne, bu t in a ceremonial role only. The IMT tr ials punished many of the people responsible for World War II and the Holoc aust, but they were also part of the American plan for building a better wo rld. As Robert Jackson, chief counsel for the United States at Nuremberg, s aid in his opening statement to the court: E2809CThe wrongs we seek to c ondemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot su rvive their being repeated.E2809D"Second Day, Wednesd ay, 11/21/1945, Part 04", in Trial of the Major War Criminals before the In ternational Military Tribunal. Volume II. Proceedings: 11/14/1945-11/30/194 5. [Official text in the English language.] Nuremberg: IMT, 1947. pp. 98-10 2.Credit CHECK FOR UNDERSTANDING Answers Iwo Ji ma was important because its location was closer to Japan and allowed U.S.  bombers a chance to refuel before bombing runs on Japan. By refueling at Iw o Jima, B-29 bombers had enough fuel to fix navigational errors and adjust  for high winds which helped them hit their targets. Answers After  the fall of Okinawa, many Japanese leaders were willing to surrender, but t hey wanted to keep Japanese emperor Hirohito in power. Many Americans blame d the emperor for the war and wanted him removed from power(an unco nditional surrender. Wrap Up t he Lesson Answer th e Guiding Questions Answers Ro osevelt wanted to bomb Tokyo, but aircraft carriers could not get close eno ugh for short-range planes to get to Japan. The Doolittle Raid, using long- range B-25 planes, bombed Japan for the first time. This prompted Japanese  military leaders to change their strategy and make plans to attack Midway.< /p> Answers Th e island-hopping strategy sought to recapture islands lost earlier to the J apanese, stop the Japanese offensive, and slowly advance toward Japan. Late r, the strategy successfully allowed planes to bomb Tokyo. Answers Po ssible answer: President Truman believed it was his duty to use every possi ble weapon to save American lives. Summarize What You Learned 4. Summ arizing Using your notes and the text, write a sentence to summarize th e actions taken by the following groups of people. Group Summary of Actions Taken Navajo Code Talkers Filipinos General Curtis LeMay President Truman Answers Navajo Code Talkers: The code talkers used their tribal language to pa ss information about Japanese military decisions. They were awarded with th e Congressional Gold Medal for their work. Filipinos: The Filipino f ighters held the Japanese off for three years while MacArthur was elsewhere . They were promised U.S. veteransE28099 benefits, but Congress canceled them. General Curtis LeMay: LeMay was commander of the B-29s based  in the Marianas. He made the call to drop napalm on military targets despit e high civilian casualties. President Truman: Truman made the decisi on to drop the atomic bombs on Japan which killed many civilians and caused significant damage. Lesson Ac tivities Answers Ar ticles should include how Navajo code talkers used their own language to de velop code words for military terms. Interpreting Information With a partner, prepare an annotated time line of the war in the Pacific. Include important battles, key figures, and images and text that convey significan t details about the events you include. Answers An swers should create a time line and include details about: Pearl Harbor; Ba taan Peninsula; Bataan Death March; Doolittle Raid; and battles of the Cora l Sea, Iwo Jima, Midway, Tarawa, Kwajalein, the Mariana Islands, and the Le yte Gulf. 20 20 The battle of Midway took place in the Pacific Ocean in an  approximate 200-mile raidus surrounding the U S territories Kure Atoll and  the Midway Islands. Key events, battles, and the sinking of ships are highl ighted as follows. 1. Japanese action. June 4, 4 30 a m. Japanese carriers  moving southeast from Japan launch 108 warplanes to strike U S base at Midw ay. 2. U S action. June 4, 6 16 a m. U.S. fighters clash with attackers jus t west of the Midway Islands. 3. Japanese action. June 4, 6 30 a m. Japanes e begin bombing Midway. 4. U S action. June 4, 7 o 8 a m. U S fliers from M idway begin attacking Japanese fleet approximately 150 miles northwest of M idway. 5. Japanese action. June 4, 9 17 a m. Japanese planes return. Fleet  turns to engage U S carriers on a path moving approximately 100 miles to th e northeast. 6. U S action. June 4, 10 22 to 10 28 a m. U S dive-bombers s core direct hits on Kaga, Akagi, and Soryu. Each sinks approximately 50 mil es to the northeast from the point the fleet turned. 7. June 4, noon. Plane s from the Hiryu attack U S carriers. Yorktown hit. The ship is abandoned  but remains afloat approximately 150 miles northeast of Midway. 8. June 4,  5 o 1 p m. Yorktown fliers join Enterprise attack on the Hiryu, setting it  ablaze approximately 100 miles from the point the fleet turned. The Hiryu r etreats approximately 50 miles west, then sinks. 9. June 6, 1 31 p m. Japan ese submarine I-168 torpedoes the Yorktown, which sinks the next morning. The Japanese Empire and its conquests include Japan, parts  of China, Burma, Thailand, Sumatra, Borneo, the Philippines, New Guinea, an d nearly all of the Pacific islands east of Japan including the Northern Ma riana Islands, Marshall Islands, Guam, Gilbert Islands, and some of the Ale utian Islands. The furthest extent of JapanE28099s conquests in July 194 2 was approximately 2,000 miles west of the country, halfway between the Ha waiian Islands and Marshall Islands. The path of Allied forces and subseque nt battles are as follows. In November 1943, the Nimitz sailed southwest fr om Pearl Harbor in the Hawaiian Islands to the battle of Tarawa in the Gilb ert Islands from November 20 to 23, 1943. Allied forces continued northwest to a battle at the Marshall Islands in February 1944, Saipan from June 15  through July 9 1944, and Guam from July 21 to August 10, 1944. The Allies t hen split off, north to battle at Iwo Jima February 19 through March 26, 19 45, northwest to battle at Okinawa from April 1 to June 22, 1945, and south west to Palau Island, then to battle at Leyte Gulf in the Philippines from  October 23 to 26, 1944. Allied forces also moved northwest from New Hebride s to battle at Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands from August 7, 1942 to Fe bruary 9, 1943, then northwest to New Guinea. Forces under the command of H alsey and Macarthur then split, and both moved north to the Philippines. Ma carthur continued north to the battle at Manila on March 4, 1945, then nort h west to the battle at Okinawa. Atomic bombings are marked at Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, and Nagasaki on August 9, 1945. 20
Although m any troops died wading ashore, one boat was able to cross the reef and deli ver troops to the beaches. The vehicle nicknamed the E2809CAlligator,E2 809D or amphtrac , was invented in the 1930s to rescue people in Florida swamps. N ever used in combat, the navy decided to buy only 200 of them in 1941. If m ore had been at Tarawa, American casualties likely would have been much low er. More than 1,000 marines lost their lives there. Photos of bodies lying  crumpled next to burning landing craft shocked Americans at home and people wondered how many lives would be lost in defeating Japan.
The next a ssault(Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands(went more sm oothly. This time all the troops went ashore in amphtracs. Although the Jap anese resisted fiercely, the marines captured Kwajalein and nearby Eniwetok with far fewer casualties.
After the  Marshall Islands, the navy targeted the Mariana Islands. American military  planners wanted to use the Marianas as a base for a new heavy bomber, the B -29 Superfortress. The B-29 could fly farther than any other plane in the w orld. From airfields in the Marianas, B-29s could bomb Japan. Admiral Nimit z decided to invade three of the Mariana Islands: Saipan, Tinian, and Guam. Despite strong Japanese resistance, American troops captured all three by  August 1944. A few months later, B-29s began bombing Japan.
Although m any troops died wading ashore, one boat was able to cross the reef and deli ver troops to the beaches. The vehicle nicknamed the E2809CAlligator,E2 809D or amphtrac , was invented in the 1930s to rescue people in Florida swamps. N ever used in combat, the navy decided to buy only 200 of them in 1941. If m ore had been at Tarawa, American casualties likely would have been much low er. More than 1,000 marines lost their lives there. Photos of bodies lying  crumpled next to burning landing craft shocked Americans at home, and peopl e wondered how many lives would be lost in defeating Japan.
The next a ssault(Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands(went more sm oothly. This time all the troops went ashore in amphtracs. Although the Jap anese resisted fiercely, the marines captured Kwajalein and nearby Eniwetok with far fewer casualties.
After the  Marshall Islands, the navy targeted the Mariana Islands. American military  planners wanted to use the Marianas as a base for a new heavy bomber, the B -29 Superfortress. The B-29 could fly farther than any other plane in the w orld. From airfields in the Marianas, B-29s could bomb Japan. Admiral Nimit z decided to invade three of the Mariana Islands: Saipan, Tinian, and Guam. Despite strong Japanese resistance, American troops captured all three by  August 1944. A few months later, B-29s began bombing Japan.
I sland Hopping in the Pacific, 1942E280931945 The Pacific Fleet gained control of the Pacific isl ands one by one on its way to defeat Japan.
Click here for the interactive version of this  map.
GEOGRAPHY CONNECTION
Admiral Nimitz went to Tarawa, part of the Gilbert Islands.
The map shows how U.S. forces progressed from Hawaii to Japan by hopp ing from island to island through the Pacific, getting closer to Japan.
As the for ces under Admiral Nimitz hopped across the central Pacific, MacArthurE280 99s troops began their own campaign in the southwest Pacific. By early 194 4, MacArthurE28099s troops finally captured enough islands to surround t he main Japanese base in the region. The Japanese withdrew their ships and  aircraft from the base, although they left 100,000 troops behind to hold th e island. Worried that the navyE28099s advance across the central Pacifi c was leaving him behind, MacArthur ordered his forces to leap nearly 600 m iles (966 km) to capture the Japanese base at Hollandia on the north coast  of New Guinea. Shortly after securing New Guinea, MacArthurE28099s troop s seized the island of Morotai(the last stop before the Philippines .
To take ba ck the Philippines, the United States assembled an enormous invasion force. In October 1944, over 700 ships carrying more than 160,000 troops sailed f or Leyte Gulf in the Philippines. On October 20, the troops began to land o n Leyte, an island on the eastern side of the Philippines. A few hours afte r the invasion began, MacArthur waded ashore. He made a radio broadcast:  E2809CPeople of the Philippines, I have returned. . . . [O]ur forces sta nd again on Philippine soil.E2809D
To stop th e American invasion, the Japanese sent four aircraft carriers toward the Ph ilippines from the north and secretly dispatched another fleet from the wes t. Most of the American carriers protecting the invasion left Leyte Gulf an d headed north to stop them. The Japanese warships to the west raced throug h the Philippine Islands into Leyte Gulf and ambushed the remaining America n ships.
The Battle of Leyte Gulf was the largest naval battle in history. It was also the fir st time that the Japanese used kamikaze attacks. Kamikaze pilots would deliberately crash their planes into American ships, inflicting severe damage. Luckily  for Americans, as the situation was becoming desperate, the Japanese comman der, believing more American ships were on the way, ordered a retreat.
Although t he Japanese fleet had retreated, the campaign to recapture the Philippines  from the Japanese was long and grueling. More than 80,000 Japanese were kil led; fewer than 1,000 surrendered. MacArthurE28099s troops did not captu re Manila until March 1945. The battle left the city in ruins and more than 100,000 Filipino civilians dead. The remaining Japanese retreated into the rugged terrain north of Manila; they were still fighting in August 1945 wh en word came that Japan had surrendered.
As the for ces under Admiral Nimitz hopped across the central Pacific, MacArthurE280 99s troops began their own campaign in the southwest Pacific. By early 194 4, MacArthurE28099s troops finally captured enough islands to surround t he main Japanese base in the region. The Japanese withdrew their ships and  aircraft from the base, although they left 100,000 troops behind to hold th e island.
Worried th at the navyE28099s advance across the central Pacific was leaving him be hind, MacArthur ordered his forces to leap nearly 600 miles (966 km) to cap ture the Japanese base at Hollandia on the north coast of New Guinea. Short ly after securing New Guinea, MacArthurE28099s troops seized the island  of Morotai(the last stop before the Philippines.
To take ba ck the Philippines, the United States assembled an enormous invasion force. In October 1944, over 700 ships carrying more than 160,000 troops sailed f or Leyte Gulf in the Philippines. On October 20, the troops began to land o n Leyte, an island on the eastern side of the Philippines. A few hours afte r the invasion began, MacArthur waded ashore. He made a radio broadcast:  E2809CPeople of the Philippines, I have returned. ... [O]ur forces stand again on Philippine soil.E2809D
To stop th e American invasion, the Japanese sent four aircraft carriers toward the Ph ilippines from the north and secretly dispatched another fleet from the wes t. Most of the American carriers protecting the invasion left Leyte Gulf an d headed north to stop them. The Japanese warships to the west raced throug h the Philippine Islands into Leyte Gulf and ambushed the remaining America n ships.
The Battle of Leyte Gulf was the largest naval battle in history. It was also the fir st time that the Japanese used kamikaze attacks. Kamikaze pilots would deliberat ely crash their planes into American ships, inflicting severe damage. Lucki ly for Americans, as the situation was becoming desperate, the Japanese com mander, believing more American ships were on the way, ordered a retreat. Although t he Japanese fleet had retreated, the campaign to recapture the Philippines  from the Japanese was long and grueling. More than 80,000 Japanese were kil led; fewer than 1,000 surrendered. MacArthurE28099s troops did not captu re Manila until March 1945. The battle left the city in ruins and more than 100,000 Filipino civilians dead. The remaining Japanese retreated into the rugged terrain north of Manila; they were still fighting in August 1945 wh en word came that Japan had surrendered.
Although t he Japanese fleet had retreated, the campaign to recapture the Philippines  from the Japanese was long and grueling. More than 80,000 Japanese were kil led; fewer than 1,000 surrendered. MacArthurE28099s troops did not captu re Manila until March 1945. The battle left the city in ruins and more than 100,000 Filipino civilians dead. The remaining Japanese retreated into the rugged terrain north of Manila; they were still fighting in August 1945 wh en word came that Japan had surrendered.
CHECK FOR UNDERSTANDING
The is land-hopping strategy sought to recapture islands lost earlier to the Japan ese, stop the Japanese offensive, and slowly advance toward Japan. Later, t he strategy successfully allowed planes to bomb Tokyo.
The U. S. Navy drove back Japanese forces by island hopping and taking control of  each island the Japanese had captured, which moved U.S. forces closer to Ja pan.
GUIDING QUESTION
Why did Tr uman decide to use the atomic bomb?
President  Roosevelt died of a stroke on April 12, 1945, while vacationing in Warm Spr ings, Georgia. His vice president, Harry S. Truman, became president. The n ext day, Truman told reporters: E2809CBoys, if you ever pray, pray for m e now. . . . When they told me yesterday what had happened, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me.E2809D Truman beg an to make decisions about the war. Although Germany surrendered a few week s later, war with Japan continued, and Truman was forced to make some of th e most difficult decisions of the war, and of his life, during his first si x months in office.
President  Roosevelt died of a stroke on April 12, 1945 while vacationing in Warm Spri ngs, Georgia. His vice president, Harry S. Truman, became president. The ne xt day, Truman told reporters: E2809CBoys, if you ever pray, pray for me now. ... When they told me yesterday what  had happened, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fall en on me.E2809D Truman began to make decisions about the war. Although G ermany surrendered a few weeks later, war with Japan continued, and Truman  was forced to make some of the most difficult decisions of the war, and of  his life, during his first six months in office.
On Novembe r 24, 1944, bombs fell on Tokyo. Eighty B-29 Superfortress bombers traveled more than 1,500 miles (2,414 km) from new American bases in the Mariana Is lands. By the time the B-29s reached Japan, however, they did not have enou gh fuel left to fix their navigational errors or to adjust for high winds.  Many of their bombs missed the targets. The pilots needed an island closer  to Japan so the B-29s could refuel. American military planners chose Iwo Ji ma. It was halfway between the Marianas and Japan, but its geography was fo rmidable, or difficult to attack. It had a dormant volcano at its southern  tip and rugged terrain with rocky cliffs, jagged ravines, and dozens of cav es. Volcanic ash covered the ground. Even worse, the Japanese had built a v ast network of concrete bunkers connected by miles of tunnels.
On Februar y 19, 1945, some 60,000 marines landed on Iwo Jima. As the troops leapt fro m the amphtracs, they sank up to their ankles in soft ash and drew intense  fire from Japanese artillery. The marines crawled inland, attacking the Jap anese bunkers with flamethrowers and explosives. More than 6,800 marines we re killed capturing the island. Admiral Nimitz later wrote that on Iwo Jima , E2809Cuncommon valor was a common virtue.E2809D
On Novembe r 24, 1944, bombs fell on Tokyo. Eighty B-29 Superfortress bombers traveled more than 1,500 miles (2,414 km) from new American bases in the Mariana Is lands. By the time the B-29s reached Japan, however, they did not have enou gh fuel left to fix their navigational errors or to adjust for high winds.  Many of their bombs missed the targets. The pilots needed an island closer  to Japan so the B-29s could refuel. American military planners chose Iwo Ji ma.
It was hal fway between the Marianas and Japan, but its geography was formidable. It h ad a dormant volcano at its southern tip and rugged terrain with rocky clif fs, jagged ravines, and dozens of caves. Volcanic ash covered the ground. E ven worse, the Japanese had built a vast network of concrete bunkers connec ted by miles of tunnels.
On Februar y 19, 1945, some 60,000 marines landed on Iwo Jima. As the troops leapt fro m the amphtracs, they sank up to their ankles in soft ash and were pounded  by Japanese artillery. The marines crawled inland, attacking the Japanese b unkers with flamethrowers and explosives. More than 6,800 marines were kill ed capturing the island. Admiral Nimitz later wrote that on Iwo Jima, E2 809Cuncommon valor was a common virtue.E2809D
Marine s raise the American flag at the highest point on Iwo Jima, February 23, 19 45. This photograph has appeared on magazine covers, postage stamps, films, and sculptures since that time.
At the time the photograph was taken, American spirits would have been li fted by this symbol of victory. Rosenthal captured these courageous men in  a moment of brotherhood, an image that evokes pride and admiration in the v iewer.
While Amer ican engineers prepared airfields on Iwo Jima, General Curtis LeMay, comman der of the B-29s based in the Marianas, changed strategy. To help the B-29s hit their targets, he ordered them to drop bombs filled with napalm(a type o f jellied gasoline. The bombs would not only explode but would also start f ires. Even if the B-29s missed their targets, the fires they started would  spread to the intended targets.
The use of firebombs was controversial because the fires would also kill many civilia ns; however, LeMay could think of no other way to quickly destroy JapanE2 8099s war production. Loaded with firebombs, B-29s attacked Tokyo on Marc h 9, 1945. As strong winds fanned the flames, the firestorm grew so intense that it sucked the oxygen out of the air, suffocating thousands.
While Amer ican engineers prepared airfields on Iwo Jima, General Curtis LeMay, comman der of the B-29s based in the Marianas, changed strategy. To help the B-29s hit their targets, he ordered them to drop bombs filled with napalm(a type o f jellied gasoline. The bombs would not only explode but would also start f ires. Even if the B-29s missed their targets, the fires they started would  spread to the intended targets.
The use of firebombs was controversial because the fires would also kill many civilia ns; however, LeMay could think of no other way to quickly destroy JapanE2 8099s war production. Loaded with firebombs, B-29s attacked Tokyo on Marc h 9, 1945. As strong winds fanned the flames, the firestorm grew so intense that it sucked the oxygen out of the air, asphyxiating thousands.
The firebo mbing of Tokyo killed more than 80,000 people and destroyed more than 250,0 00 buildings. By the end of June 1945, JapanE28099s six key industrial c ities had been firebombed. By the end of the war, the B-29s had firebombed  67 Japanese cities.
The firebo mbing of Tokyo killed more than 80,000 people and destroyed more than 250,0 00 buildings. By the end of June 1945, JapanE28099s six key industrial c ities had been firebombed. By the end of the war, the B-29s had firebombed  67 Japanese cities.
There were few signs in the spring of 1945 that Japan was ready to quit. Many America n officials believed Japan must be invaded. To prepare for the invasion, th e United States needed a base near Japan to stockpile supplies and build up troops. Military planners chose Okinawa(only 350 miles (563 km) fr om mainland Japan.
American t roops landed on Okinawa on April 1, 1945. Japanese troops took up positions in the islandE28099s rugged mountains. To force the Japanese out of the ir caves and bunkers, the American troops had to fight their way up steep s lopes against constant machine gun and artillery fire. More than 12,000 Ame rican soldiers, sailors, and marines died during the fighting, but by June  22, 1945, Okinawa had finally been captured.
Shortly af ter the United States captured Okinawa, Japanese emperor Hirohito urged his government to find a way to end the war. American officials knew that the  fate of Hirohito was the most important issue for the Japanese. Demands for unconditional surrender might mean that the emperor would step down. Many  Japanese leaders were willing to surrender, but only on the condition that  Hirohito stay in power. Most Americans, however, wanted to remove the emper or from power. President Truman was reluctant to go against public opinion. Furthermore, he knew the United States was almost ready to test the new at omic bomb that might drive Japan to surrender.
There were few signs in the spring of 1945 that Japan was ready to quit. Many America n officials believed Japan must be invaded. To prepare for the invasion, th e United States needed a base near Japan to stockpile supplies and build up troops. Military planners chose Okinawa(only 350 miles (563 km) fr om mainland Japan.
American t roops landed on Okinawa on April 1, 1945. Japanese troops took up positions in the islandE28099s rugged mountains. To force the Japanese out of the ir caves and bunkers, the American troops had to fight their way up steep s lopes against constant machine gun and artillery fire. More than 12,000 Ame rican soldiers, sailors, and marines died during the fighting, but by June  22, 1945, Okinawa had finally been captured.
Shortly af ter the United States captured Okinawa, Japanese emperor Hirohito urged his government to find a way to end the war. American officials knew that the  fate of Hirohito was the most important issue for the Japanese. Demands for unconditional surrender might mean that the emperor would step down. Many  Japanese leaders were willing to surrender, but only on the condition that  Hirohito stay in power. Most Americans, however, wanted to remove the emper or from power. President Truman was reluctant to go against public opinion. Furthermore, he knew the United States was almost ready to test the new at omic bomb that might drive Japan to surrender.
In 1939 Le o Szilard, a Jewish physicist who had fled Nazi persecution, learned that G erman scientists had split the uranium atom. Szilard had been the first sci entist to suggest that splitting the atom might release enormous energy. Sz ilard convinced the worldE28099s best-known physicist, Albert Einstein,  to sign a letter Szilard had drafted and send it to President Roosevelt. Th e letter warned that by using uranium, E2809Cextremely powerful bombs of a new type may . . . be constructed.E2809D
Roosevelt  responded by setting up a scientific committee to study the issue. In 1941  the committee met with British scientists who were already working on an at omic bomb. The Americans convinced Roosevelt to launch a program to build a n atomic bomb.
The secret American program to build an atomic bomb was code-named the Manhattan Proj ect and was headed by General Leslie R. Groves. The first breakthrough came in 1942, when Szilard and Enrico Fermi, another physicist, built the world E28099s first nuclear reactor at the University of Chicago. Groves then organ ized a team of engineers and scientists to build an atomic bomb at a secret laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico. Physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer led  the team. On July 16, 1945, they detonated the worldE28099s first atomic bomb in New Mexico.
In 1939 Le o Szilard, a Jewish physicist who had fled Nazi persecution, learned that G erman scientists had split the uranium atom. Szilard had been the first sci entist to suggest that splitting the atom might release enormous energy. Sz ilard convinced the worldE28099s best-known physicist, Albert Einstein,  to sign a letter Szilard had drafted and send it to President Roosevelt. Th e letter warned that by using uranium, E2809Cextremely powerful bombs of a new type may ... be constructed.E280 9D
Roosevelt  responded by setting up a scientific committee to study the issue. In 1941  the committee met with British scientists who were already working on an at omic bomb. The Americans convinced Roosevelt to launch a program to build a n atomic bomb.
The secret American program to build an atomic bomb was code-named the Manhattan Proj ect and was headed by General Leslie R. Groves. The first breakthrough came in 1942, when Szilard and Enrico Fermi, another physicist, built the world E28099s first nuclear reactor at the University of Chicago. Groves then organ ized a team of engineers and scientists to build an atomic bomb at a secret laboratory in Los Alamos, New Mexico. Physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer led  the team. On July 16, 1945, they detonated the worldE28099s first atomic bomb in New Mexico.
Even befor e the bomb was tested, officials began debating how to use it. Admiral Will iam Leahy, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, opposed using the bomb be cause it would kill civilians. He believed an economic blockade and convent ional bombing would convince Japan to surrender. Secretary of War Henry Sti mson wanted to warn the Japanese about the bomb and tell them their emperor could stay in power if they surrendered. Secretary of State James Byrnes,  however, wanted to drop the bomb on Japan without any warning.
President  Truman later wrote that he E2809Cregarded the bomb as a military weapon  and never had any doubt that it should be used.E2809D His advisers had w arned him to expect massive casualties if the United States invaded Japan.  Truman believed it was his duty as president to use every weapon available  to save American lives. The Allies threatened Japan with E2809Cprompt an d utter destructionE2809D if the nation did not surrender, but the Japan ese did not reply. Truman then ordered the military to drop the bomb. On Au gust 6, 1945, a B-29 bomber named Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb,  code-named E2809CLittle Boy,E2809D on Hiroshima, an important industr ial city.
The bomb d estroyed about 63 percent of the city. Between 80,000 and 120,000 people, i ncluding children, died instantly, and thousands more died later from burns and radiation sickness. Three days later, on August 9, the Soviet Union de clared war on Japan. Later that day, the United States dropped another atom ic bomb, code-named E2809CFat Man,E2809D on the city of Nagasaki, kil ling between 35,000 and 74,000 people. Faced with such massive destruction  and the shock of the Soviets joining the war, Hirohito ordered his governme nt to surrender. On August 15, 1945(V-J Day(Japan surrender ed. The long war was finally over.
Even befor e the bomb was tested, officials began debating how to use it. Admiral Will iam Leahy, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, opposed using the bomb be cause it would kill civilians. He believed an economic blockade and convent ional bombing would convince Japan to surrender. Secretary of War Henry Sti mson wanted to warn the Japanese about the bomb and tell them their emperor could stay in power if they surrendered. Secretary of State James Byrnes,  however, wanted to drop the bomb on Japan without any warning.
President  Truman later wrote that he E2809Cregarded the bomb as a military weapon  and never had any doubt that it should be used.E2809D His advisers had w arned him to expect massive casualties if the United States invaded Japan.  Truman believed it was his duty as president to use every weapon available  to save American lives. The Allies threatened Japan with E2809Cprompt an d utter destructionE2809D if the nation did not surrender, but the Japan ese did not reply. Truman then ordered the military to drop the bomb. On Au gust 6, 1945, a B-29 bomber named Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb , code-named E2809CLittle Boy,E2809D on Hiroshima, an important indus trial city.
The bomb d estroyed about 63 percent of the city. Between 80,000 and 120,000 people, i ncluding children, died instantly, and thousands more died later from burns and radiation sickness. Three days later, on August 9, the Soviet Union de clared war on Japan. Later that day, the United States dropped another atom ic bomb, code-named E2809CFat Man,E2809D on the city of Nagasaki, kil ling between 35,000 and 74,000 people. Faced with such massive destruction  and the shock of the Soviets joining the war, Hirohito ordered his governme nt to surrender. On August 15, 1945(V-J Day(Japan surrender ed. The long war was finally over.
Explore each of the four slides with the button s below them.
Answer s should describe the total decimation of the area.
In August  1945, the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union created the  International Military Tribunal (IMT) to punish German and Japanese leaders for war crimes. The tribunal held trials in Nuremberg, Germany, where Hitl er had staged Nazi Party rallies.
In January 1946, the International Military Tribunal for the Far East (IMTFE) was cre ated in Tokyo, authorized by an agreement among the United States, the Sovi et Union, and the United Kingdom. Like the trials held in Nuremberg, the pu rpose of the Tokyo War Crimes trials was to punish Japanese leaders.
The IMTFE  prosecuted nine senior Japanese leaders and 18 military leaders. During the trials, which lasted from 1946 to 1948, all defendants were found guilty.  Punishments ranged from imprisonment to death. Hirohito was not indicted by the IMTFE, as some feared that any attempt to put the emperor on trial wou ld lead to an uprising. The emperor was allowed to remain on the throne, bu t in a ceremonial role only.
The IMT tr ials punished many of the people responsible for World War II and the Holoc aust, but they were also part of the American plan for building a better wo rld. As Robert Jackson, chief counsel for the United States at Nuremberg, s aid in his opening statement to the court: E2809CThe wrongs we seek to c ondemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot su rvive their being repeated.E2809D
In August  1945, the United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union created the  International Military Tribunal (IMT) to punish German and Japanese leaders for war crimes. The tribunal held trials in Nuremberg, Germany, where Hitl er had staged Nazi Party rallies.
In January 1946, the International Military Tribunal for the Far East (IMTFE) was cre ated in Tokyo, authorized by an agreement among the United States, the Sovi et Union, and the United Kingdom. Like the trials held in Nuremberg, the pu rpose of the Tokyo War Crimes trials was to punish Japanese leaders.
The IMTFE  prosecuted nine senior Japanese leaders and 18 military leaders. During the trials, which lasted from 1946 to 1948, all defendants were found guilty.  Punishments ranged from imprisonment to death. Hirohito was not indicted by the IMTFE, as some feared that any attempt to put the emperor on trial wou ld lead to an uprising. The emperor was allowed to remain on the throne, bu t in a ceremonial role only.
The IMT tr ials punished many of the people responsible for World War II and the Holoc aust, but they were also part of the American plan for building a better wo rld. As Robert Jackson, chief counsel for the United States at Nuremberg, s aid in his opening statement to the court: E2809CThe wrongs we seek to c ondemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored because it cannot su rvive their being repeated.E2809D
CHECK FOR UNDERSTANDING
Iwo Ji ma was important because its location was closer to Japan and allowed U.S.  bombers a chance to refuel before bombing runs on Japan. By refueling at Iw o Jima, B-29 bombers had enough fuel to fix navigational errors and adjust  for high winds which helped them hit their targets.
After  the fall of Okinawa, many Japanese leaders were willing to surrender, but t hey wanted to keep Japanese emperor Hirohito in power. Many Americans blame d the emperor for the war and wanted him removed from power(an unco nditional surrender.
Ro osevelt wanted to bomb Tokyo, but aircraft carriers could not get close eno ugh for short-range planes to get to Japan. The Doolittle Raid, using long- range B-25 planes, bombed Japan for the first time. This prompted Japanese  military leaders to change their strategy and make plans to attack Midway.< /p>
Th e island-hopping strategy sought to recapture islands lost earlier to the J apanese, stop the Japanese offensive, and slowly advance toward Japan. Late r, the strategy successfully allowed planes to bomb Tokyo.
Po ssible answer: President Truman believed it was his duty to use every possi ble weapon to save American lives.
4. Summ arizing Using your notes and the text, write a sentence to summarize th e actions taken by the following groups of people.
Navajo Code Talkers: The code talkers used their tribal language to pa ss information about Japanese military decisions. They were awarded with th e Congressional Gold Medal for their work. Filipinos: The Filipino f ighters held the Japanese off for three years while MacArthur was elsewhere . They were promised U.S. veteransE28099 benefits, but Congress canceled them. General Curtis LeMay: LeMay was commander of the B-29s based  in the Marianas. He made the call to drop napalm on military targets despit e high civilian casualties. President Truman: Truman made the decisi on to drop the atomic bombs on Japan which killed many civilians and caused significant damage.
Ar ticles should include how Navajo code talkers used their own language to de velop code words for military terms.
An swers should create a time line and include details about: Pearl Harbor; Ba taan Peninsula; Bataan Death March; Doolittle Raid; and battles of the Cora l Sea, Iwo Jima, Midway, Tarawa, Kwajalein, the Mariana Islands, and the Le yte Gulf.
